KEP: Efficient watch resumption after kube-apiserver reboot (#1878)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-api-machinery/1904-efficient-watch-resumption/README.md

- [ ] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [ ] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [ ] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

The kube-apiserver watch cache is initialized from etcd at the moment

> when it starts with empty transaction log. As a consequence, clients

Reviewer: ```suggestion
when it starts with empty change history. As a consequence, clients
```

?

Author: done

list, even though it is only requesting objects of that resource type,
returns "globally current version for the whole etcd".

While the inability to reestablish watch doesn't happen often in practice,
the kube-apiserver restarts obviously does (e.g. on upgrades). And this
is resulting in two main problems:

1. In case of rolling upgrade of kube-apiserver, when no object of a given
   resource type is changing (but objects of other types do), all watchers
   will eventually be forced to relist, causing significant performance
   and scalability issues for larger clusters. See the example below for
   clarification.

1. If no object of a given resource type is changing after kube-apiserver
  startup, watch cache may stuck being synced to resource version not being
	version of any object of a given type for extended period of time. See
  https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/91073 for more details.

To illustrate the problem better, imagine the following example:
- there is a single kube-apiserver that we are going to restart
- there are only two resource types: X and Y (for simplicity)
- there is one object of type X: x with rv=100

> - there is one object of type Y: y with rv=101

Reviewer: Thanks, this is much easier to follow now, I think you can also remove references to type Y?

Author: Actually it is needed, because I need some non-X-type object that is bumping be global resource version.

- there is a watch W for objects of type X already synced to rv=100
- watchcache for both X and Y is up-to-date

- T1: kube-apiserver being restarted
- T2: kube-apiserver is initialized with watchcache for X synced to
   rv=101 (most recent etcd version)
- T3: watch W is trying to reconnect, given rv=100 is outside of
   supported history window (we only support versions from 101 being
   the moment of watch cache initialization), relist is forced

Note that adding more kube-apiservers doesn't solve the problem. In
fact, it is introducing the second problem where watch cache in different
instances may be out of sync for long period of time. To achieve such
situation it is enough to have object y be updated to rv=102 between
the moment kube-apiserver-1 is initialized and kube-apiserver-2 starts
its initialization. And we would stuck with kube-apiserver-1 synced to
rv=101 and kube-apiserve-2 synced to rv=102 until the next change of

> any object of type X happens (even though both watch caches contain the

Reviewer: OK, you're talking about something I guess I didn't understand from the first draft, and actually I still don't think I understand it.

Are you saying that a low-churn resource type could get stuck in the distant past due to an unrelated high-churn type?

Whatever this second problem is, does it actually cause different effects than the first problem?

Author: It's not exactly like that.

I have updated this part of clear example (without mixing it with the first problem).
Is it more clear now?

same state).

From the first glance it may look like having many kube-apiservers can
mitigate this problem. However, if no object of type X is being changed
for extended period of time, this doesn't help and I've seen multiple
large production clusters with tens of thousands of pods for which any
pod was changing for long enough periods of time (e.g. tens of minutes).

The goal of this proposal is to avoid both of these problems.

### Goals

- avoid tons of relists during kube-apiservers rolling upgrades
- avoid different instances of kube-apiserver stuck with watchcache synced

>   to different resource versions for extended period of time

Reviewer: Ah, OK, now I understand what the second problem is. I think the example needs more detail about when the cache "syncs" to the global index and when in "syncs" to the highest index of an object in the collection.

Can you make the problem example more extreme like this? Imagine a collection with objects a, b, c, having RVs 1, 2, 5000 respectively. Now object c is deleted at an inconvenient time while an apiserver is starting. Does this apiserver now believe it is only synced to RV=2 for this collection?

Author: Actually it's not the case.

Watchcache claims to be synced to RV of the latest change of the object of a given type. Deletions are handled correctly (so e.g. if the deletion was at RV=6000), it will claim to be synced to 6000, not 2. So that works fine already.

I clairified that in line 89 [I though I wrote that already, but apparently I it wasn't the case.]

The problem is purely with initialization, because initialization is happening NOT from the objects of a given type, but from "global etcd version" (which doesn't have to represent any object of our type).

Reviewer: OK, that's good to know. The problem I guess is that deletion records aren't loaded on startup.

Author: That isn't really it. Because the RV of the LIST, doesn't depend on what was happening before.
And we don't load events at all (if we would, deletions would load correctly, since these are regular watch events).

      levels that could help debug the issue?
      Not required until feature graduated to beta.
    - Testing: Are there any tests for failure mode? If not, describe why.

* **What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?**

[supported limits]: https://git.k8s.io/community//sig-scalability/configs-and-limits/thresholds.md
[existing SLIs/SLOs]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#kubernetes-slisslos

## Implementation History

2020-06-30: KEP Proposed.

## Drawbacks

n/a

## Alternatives

### Initialize watch cache from etcd history window

The main alternative to the above solution would be to change the way how
watch cache is initialized to not only initialize the state but also a
transaction log (i.e. read the whole etcd history and initialize transaction
log based on it).

Pros:
- doesn't require any etcd changes
- no overhead when kube-apiserver is running (only initialization being more
   expensive)

Cons:
- given kube-apiserver is performing compaction (default every 5m), lack of
   changes of any object of type X within that period would result in inability

>    to initialize transaction log anyway; so that is not universal solution

Reviewer: Isn't getting the latest RV the most valuable part, though?

Author: That doesn't solve the second problem though (i.e. you can have multiple kube-apiservers out-of-sync for extended period of time).

Based on your comments above, I think you misunderstood that second problem - so hopefully with new clarifications it's clearer what I mean here.

Reviewer: Ah, so the actual need is to select the oldest RV that is greater than any change to the objects in the collection.

If it weren't for deleted objects not showing up in the list, it would be trivial, you wouldn't even need to read the change history.

But if we can read the change history, I don't agree with this con. If you can get:
* the list of changes from the history window since the last compaction, and it is empty
* C = RV of the last compaction
* O = greatest RV of an object returned by list
* G = global RV as of the time of the list
and if O < C <= G, then it is safe to pretend that you've synced to C instead of G. (given that the list is empty, this will always be the case. If the list is not empty you can still use C as the RV as long as you fill the revision history in memory with the list.)

This seems like a much less time-sensitive fix than relying on not being about to generate the condition in 250ms.

It may be reasonable to make both fixes, but if we pre-fill the cache like this, then we just need to give the client an RV newer than the last compaction, which is drastically less frequent than 250ms.

Author: > Ah, so the actual need is to select the oldest RV that is greater than any change to the objects in the collection.

Probably equal to the most fresh change instead of "great than any change to the objects in this collection" (we need to be able to say from which point in time we can start serving watches and be sure that nothing has happened after that). 
But yeah - this is +-1 difference, so probably doesn't matter.

> the list of changes from the history window since the last compaction, and it is empty

This one is tricky. Because even if we would have a way to expose RV of the last compaction, the all changes since then we can only get via watch. And if we establish watch, we have no way to say if it already synced to now or not...
We can probably solve that with using ProgressNotify again, but I think we would end-up with similarly if not more complicated solution (with the solution I'm proposing there aren't any corner cases)...

Reviewer: OK, here's a very stupid idea that is probably easy to implement and effective.

When filling the watch cache, currently we start watching for changes at the index given by the list.

Imagine a change that, in addition to doing that, also "binary" searches backwards in time with a series of watch requests.

E.g.:
* watch zero is at RV=X. Cache is now synced to X. We let this watch continue. (same watch we do today.)
* watch 1 is at RV=X-1000. We get an out-of-window error.
* watch 2 is at RV=X-500. We get 3 changes with RVs < X; we prepend them to our change list and now our cache is synced to X-500. Close the watch.
* watch 3 is at RV = X-750, out of window.
* watch 4 is at RV = X-625, we get 1 additional change, prepend it, cache is now synced at RV=X-625.

4 iterations is probably more than enough, but you can use this technique to find the exact limit (which might be a moving target!).

Author: Yeah - I've been thinking about that too. But imagine there are no changes after RV=X.
So when you initialized watch2 from RV=X-500 - how you can answer whether it already reached X or not?

Reviewer: Well, not getting an out-of-window error tells us something?

We could enable progress-notify on these extra watches :)

Author: > We could enable progress-notify on these extra watches :)

Sure - but with that we need to do most of changes described in the doc anyway...

I guess what I'm saying is that - sure we can do that, but it's actually not that much simpler (if at all).
[Note that we would need to be able to present history, which we don't support now, so another complication to what people, including Jordan already claim to be terribly complicated...]

Reviewer: It is a change, and it makes the watch system more complicated, but it's localized and doesn't change any client-visible interfaces. In that sense it is well contained. We can make sure the testing is good. Personally I feel like making apiserver load prior history adds a lot of robustness to the system, and making the system depend on something happening every 250ms adds brittleness.

But it may be time for @deads2k and @liggitt to weigh in.

Author: If we would really require these 250ms for something - true. But we can tolerate much more (given kube-apiserver initializes tens of seconds anyway).

Author: Or I should say it a bit differently. In order to utilize the progress notify to detect whether watch already synced to RV=X, we basically need to bump the frequency to something reasonable from the current 10m anyway. So pretty much all the changes described in this proposal would have to be implemented anyway.

Author: Or let me actually write it differently:
I'm not opposed to changing how we initialize watchcache, but based on all the arguments above (mostly need for watch progress notify to implement it, the fact that we can still have two apiservers claimed to be synced to different RVs for extended period of time), I would treat it as a complementary not a replacement of what I'm proposing.

Reviewer: The frequency change requires etcd work? Or is it just a setting when you start a watch?

I'm uncomfortable with the solution being strongly time dependent. I currently still think I'd like apiserver to pre-load enough items into the cache to make the chance of a race extremely low. If we can make the "race window" 10s instead of 250ms, I think I'm fine with that.

Author: > The frequency change requires etcd work? Or is it just a setting when you start a watch?

Yes - currently progress notify is hardcoded to be sent every 10m.

>  If we can make the "race window" 10s instead of 250ms, I think I'm fine with that.

I already wrote above that 250ms doesn't seem to be needed. I was thinking about something between 1s and 5s. But maybe 10s is good enough too? What we need is to ensure that in rolling-upgrade scenario, the next-to-be-updated kube-apiserver will get a progress-notify event *after* the previous is initialized.

So 10s sounds fine to me to - given we want to send bookmarks on shutdown we need to be able to catch the signal and propagate it down. So we can also wait for the next progress notify in that scenario.

Actually - the above are important details about how this can/should be tuned. I added it to the proposed solution above (in the Proposal section).

Author: @lavalamp - hopefully this addresses your concern?:
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1878/files#diff-d73a72730139197a054ffcd22466d771R243-R254

Reviewer: OK, yeah, that should keep it from being racy.

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

The kube-apiserver watch cache is initialized from etcd at the moment
when it starts with empty change history. As a consequence, clients
that want to resume a watch immediately after kube-apiserver reboots
almost always have a resource version that is out of the history window.
In this KEP we propose how to address this problem.

## Motivation

In order to support large Kubernetes clusters without huge number of etcd
and kube-apiserver replicas, kube-apiserver contains an in-memory cache
called `watch cache` from which all watch requests as well as non-quorum
reads (in opt-in fashion) are served. Watch cache is being propagated
directly from etcd using typical "list + watch" pattern and stores both

> the current state as well as som recent 'transaction log'. There is a

Reviewer 2: typo: some

separate watch cache for each resource type version.

Digging into more details, the way how watch cache is propagated is:
- on start, quorum list is send to etcd
- given the RV of the list represents the current "global etcd version",
  it doesn't have to reflect any change of objects of our type
- the watch cache is set to be synced to list resource version (which
  as mentioned above isn't necessary reflecting any change of objects
  of that type)
- from the on, watch to etcd is established and watch cache is being
  updated by incoming watch event stream; note that only objects of
  a given resource type are being watched and only those can update
  the resource version to which watch cache is synced from then on
- if watch cannot be reestablished, all watchers connected to it are
  disconnected, a new quorum list is send and watchcache is reset to
  that point in time

It's important to note that while only objects of a given resource type
are watched (thus resource version to which watch cache is synced can
only be updated to a value that some object of that type had), the quorum
list, even though it is only requesting objects of that resource type,

> returns "globally current version for the whole etcd".

Reviewer: Yeah, this condition is per-etcd backend.

the kube-apiserver restarts obviously does (e.g. on upgrades). And this
is resulting in two main problems:

1. In case of rolling upgrade of kube-apiserver, when no object of a given
   resource type is changing (but objects of other types do), all watchers
   will eventually be forced to relist, causing significant performance
   and scalability issues for larger clusters. See the example below for
   clarification.

1. If no object of a given resource type is changing after kube-apiserver
  startup, watch cache may stuck being synced to resource version not being
	version of any object of a given type for extended period of time. See
  https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/91073 for more details.

To illustrate the problem better, imagine the following example:
- there is a single kube-apiserver that we are going to restart
- there are only two resource types: X and Y (for simplicity)
- there is one object of type X: x with rv=100
- there is one object of type Y: y with rv=101
- there is a watch W for objects of type X already synced to rv=100
- watchcache for both X and Y is up-to-date

- T1: kube-apiserver being restarted

> - T2: kube-apiserver is initialized with watchcache for X synced to

Reviewer 2: it initialized this based on a list, correct?  if so, please indicate that inline.

   rv=101 (most recent etcd version)
- T3: watch W is trying to reconnect, given rv=100 is outside of
   supported history window (we only support versions from 101 being
   the moment of watch cache initialization), relist is forced

Note that adding more kube-apiservers doesn't solve the problem. In
fact, it is introducing the second problem where watch cache across
kube-apiserver instances may be out of sync for extended period of time.

To illustrate this problem imagine the following example:
- the setup is as above, with the only difference of two kube-apiservers

- T1: kube-apiserver-1 being restarted
- T2: kube-apiserver-1 is initialized with watchcache for X synced to
   rv=101 (most recent etcd version) [as above]
- T3: object y is being updated to rv=102
- T4: kube-apiserver-2 is being restarted
- T5: kube-apiserver-2 is initialized with watchcache for X synced to
   rv=102 (most recent etcd version)

As long as no object of type X is being touched (created, updated or

> deleted), watchcache for X will not be updates. So even though they

Reviewer: I still do not understand how this is different from the first problem. In both scenarios, for resource X, apiserver has an empty change window and believes X is synced to an RV number which a) is greater than any actual X object change's RV, and b) at which no X change happened.

In the second scenario there are multiple apiservers in the condition at the same time, at different RV numbers, but I don't see how that makes it worse.

I feel like there's some additional fact missing here, like if the RV given by list X from apiserver 2 can't be used to watch X on apiserver 1. But this doesn't seem like a big problem, since most list/watch calls will go to the same apiserver (and if you add a restart to break this, then it really is no different from problem 1). Additionally, for N apiservers in this condition at different RVs, the probability of a split-apiserver list/watch working is probably around 50% since the RV needn't exactly match? If it needed to exactly match the RV, the probability would be like N^-2 and that would get my attention :)

Author: > In the second scenario there are multiple apiservers in the condition at the same time, at different RV numbers, but I don't see how that makes it worse.

So the problem is that if you list from the newer kube-apiserver and then try to establish watch from that point in the older kube-apiserver you get "too old RV". And need to relist again. If you're unlucky, it may be indefinite...

Basically the problem is that you get different responses for the same request from two kube-apiservers for extended period of time, even though there isn't any network partition or anything like that.
I would say it's far from expected...

contain the same set of objects, one claims to be synced to rv=101
and the other claims to be synced to rv=102.

> This may result in resuming watches across api-servers to suffer from

Reviewer 2: This appears to be the meat. Bold it perhaps?  Getting stuck in the state is unfortunate.

"too old resource version" errors in a steady state.

From the first glance it may look like having many kube-apiservers can
mitigate this problem. However, if no object of type X is being changed
for extended period of time, this doesn't help and I've seen multiple

> large production clusters with tens of thousands of pods for which any

Reviewer 2: I can't parse this sentence.  missing word maybe?  No pod was changing?
